THE OLD ASTRONOMER, EDITED

He may know the law of all things, yet be ignorant of how
We are working to completion, working on from then till now.
And remember, men will scorn it, 'tis original and true,
And the obloquy of newness may fall bitterly on you.

But, my pupil, as my pupil you have learnt the worth of scorn ;
You have laughed with me at pity, we have joyed to be forlorn ;
What, for us, are all distractions of men's fellowship and smiles?
What, for us, are gods' temptations, with their meretricious wiles?

You may tell that German college that their honour comes too late.
But they must not waste repentance on the grizzly savant's fate ;
Though my soul may set in darkness, it will rise in perfect light ;
I have loved the stars too truly to be fearful of the night.

What, my pupil, are you weeping? You should save your eyes for sight!
You will need them, mine observer, yet for many another night.
Pray, remember, that I leave you all my theory complete,
Lacking only certain data, for your adding, no great feat;

A long time ago my mother left her blessing on my brow,
There has been a something wanting in my nature until now ;
I can dimly comprehend it, — that I might have been more kind,
Might have cherished you more wisely, as the one I leave behind.

But your spirit is untainted, I can dedicate you still
To the service of our science : will you further it ? you will !

There are certain calculations I should like to make with you,
To be sure that your deductions will be logical and true;
And remember, " Patience, Patience," is the watchword of a sage,
Not to-day nor yet to-morrow can complete a perfect age.

I have sown, for many years now, that a greater may reap ;
But if none should do my reaping, 'twill disturb me in my sleep.
So be careful and be faithful, though, like me, you leave no name
See, my boy, that nothing turn you to the mere pursuit of fame.

I must say Good-bye, my pupil, for I cannot longer speak ;
I'm afraid the ills I suffer make it painful, make me weak
But tonight they do not matter, earthly injuries or scars
God will mercifully guide me on my way amongst the stars.
